As To Gradation
1. Units
1. Things making for offences should be known.²
2. Things not making for offences should be known.³
3. An offence should be known.⁴
4. What is not an offence should be known.⁵
5. A slight offence should be known.⁶



6. A serious offence should be known.¹
7. An offence that can be done away with should be known.²
8. An offence that cannot be done away with should be known.³ BD 6.172
9. A very bad offence should be known.⁴
10. An offence that is not very bad should be known.⁵
11. An offence for which amends are made should be known.⁶
12. An offence for which amends are not made should be known.⁷
13. An offence leading on to confession should be known.⁸
14. An offence not leading on to confession should be known.⁹
15. An offence that is a stumbling-block should be known.¹⁰
16. An offence the description (of which) is “blamable” should be
known.¹¹


An offence the description (of which) is “non-blamable”should
be known.
18. An offence originated by action should be known.²
19. An offence originated by non-action should be known.³
20. An offence originated by action-and-non-action should be
known.⁴
21. The original offence should be known.⁵
22. The subsequent offence should be known.⁶
23. The secondary offences⁷ of original offences should be known. BD 6.173
24. The secondary offences of subsequent offences should be known.⁸
25. An offence confessed that comes to a reckoning should be


known.¹
26. An offence confessed that does not come to a reckoning should
be known.²
27. A laying down should be known.³
28. A supplementary laying (down should be known.⁴
29. A laying down that has not yet occurred should be known.⁵
30. A laying down (that holds good) everywhere should be known.⁶
31. A laying down (that holds good only) for certain districts should
be known.⁷
32. A laying down that is shared should be known.⁸
33. A laying down that is not shared should be known.⁹
34. A laying down for one (Order only) should be known.¹⁰
35. A laying down for both (Orders) should be known.¹¹
36. An offence that is a grave fault should be known.¹²
37. An offence that is not a grave fault should be known.¹³
38. An offence connected with the laity should be known.¹⁴
39. An offence not connected with the laity should be known.
40. An offence that is fixed (as to results) should be known.¹⁵ BD 6.174
41. An offence that is not (so) fixed should be known.¹⁶
42. The individual who was the first-doer (of an offence) should


be known.¹
43. The individual who was not the first-doer should be known.²
44. The individual who is an occasional offender should be known.³
45. The individual who is a constant offender should be known.⁴
46. The individual (at all these places) who reproves (for an offence)
should be known.⁵
47. The individual who is reproved should be known.⁶
48. The individual who reproves according to what is not the rule
should be known.⁷
49. The individual who is reproved according to what is not the
rule should be known.⁸
50. The individual who reproves according to the rule should be
known.⁹
51. The individual who is reproved according to the rule should be
known.¹⁰
52. The individual who is certain should be known.¹¹
53. The individual who is not certain should be known.
54. The individual incapable of offending should be known.¹²
55. The individual capable of offending should be known.¹³
56. The individual who has been suspended¹⁴ should be known.


The individual who has not been suspended should be known.¹
58. The individual who has been expelled should be known.² BD 6.175
59. The individual who has not been expelled should be known.
60. An individual belonging to the same communion should be
known.³
61. An individual not belonging to the same communion should
be known.
62. Suspension (of the Pātimokkha) should be known.⁴
Concluded are the Units
its summary
Things making for, offence, slight, that can be done away with, very bad,
For which amends are made, and confession, stumbling-block,⁵ blamable,
originating by action, /
By action-and-non-action, original, secondary,⁶ coming to a reckoning,
Laying down, not yet occurred, everywhere, and shared, for one, /
Grave fault, laity, and fixed, first, occasional, reprover, Vin 5.116 Not the rule, the rule, fixed, incapable, suspended, expelled,
The same, and suspension too: this is the summary⁷ for the Units. /


2. Dyads
Prv 7.2.1 1. ⁸ There is the offence in which (contemporary) awareness
counts (as a factor) for acquittal; there is the offence in which
(contemporary) awareness does not count (as a factor) for acquittal.
⁹


There is an offence for the attainer of the acquired; there is the
offence for the attainer of what is not acquired.BD 6.176
3. There is the offence that is connected with true Dhamma²; there
is the offence that is not connected with true Dhamma.³
4. There is an offence connected with one’s own requisites⁴; …
with another’s requisites.⁵
5. There is an offence connected with one’s own individual⁶; …
with another’s individual.⁷
6. There is (the occasion when one) falls into a serious offence
when speaking the truth,⁸ a slight one when speaking a lie⁹.
7. There is (the occasion when one) falls into a serious offence
when speaking a lie,¹⁰ a slight one when speaking the truth.¹¹
8. There is the offence one who is on the ground falls into,¹² not
one who is in the air¹³; there is the offence one who is in the


air falls into,not one who is on the ground.²
9. One falls into an offence while one is setting out not while
entering³; one falls into an offence while one is entering, not
while setting out.⁴
10. There is the offence one falls into while taking⁵; … while not
taking.⁶
11. There is the offence one falls into while undertaking⁷; … while BD 6.177
not undertaking.⁸
12. There is the offence one falls into when one is doing⁹; … is not
doing.¹⁰
13. There is the offence one falls into while giving¹¹; … while not
giving.¹²
14. There is the offence one falls into while accepting¹³; … while
not accepting.¹⁴
15. There is the offence one falls into through using¹⁵; … through


not using.¹
16. There is the offence one falls into during the night, not by day²;
… by day, not during the night.³
17. There is the offence one falls into at sunrise;⁴ … not at sunrise.⁵
18. There is the offence one falls into while cutting off;⁶ … while
not cutting off.⁷
19. There is the offence one falls into by concealing⁸; while not
concealing.⁹
20. There is the offence one falls into by wearing (using)¹⁰; … not
using (wearing).¹¹
21. There are two Observances: that on the fourteenth day and BD 6.178
that on the fifteenth.¹²
22. Two Invitations: that on the fourteenth day and that on the
fifteenth.¹³
23. Two (formal) acts: the (formal) act for which leave should be
asked, and the (formal) act at which a motion is put.
24. And there are two further (formal) acts: the (formal) act at
which a motion is put and is followed by one resolution, and
the (formal) act at which a motion is put and is followed by a
resolution made three times.¹⁴
25. Two matters for a (formal) act¹⁵: the matter of a (formal) act
for which leave should be asked, and the matter of a (formal)


act at which a motion is put.
26. And two further matters for a (formal) act: the matter for a
(formal) act at which a motion is put and is followed by one
resolution, and the matter for a (formal) act at which a motion
is put and is followed by a resolution made three times.
27. Two defectsin a (formal) act: the defect in a (formal) act for
which leave should be asked, the defect in the motion for a
(formal) act.
28. And two further defects in a (formal) act: the defect in a (formal)
act where a motion is put and is followed by one resolution,
and the defect in a (formal) act where a motion is put and
is followed by a resolution made three times.
29. Two excellences² in a (formal) act: the excellence of a (formal)
act for which leave should be asked, and the excellence of a
(formal) act where there is a motion.
30. And two further excellences in a (formal) act: the excellence
of a (formal) act at which a motion is put and is followed by
one resolution, and the excellence of a (formal) act at which a
motion is put and is followed by a resolution made three times.
31. Two grounds for belonging to a different communion: either of
oneself one makes oneself belong to a different communion,³
or a complete Order suspends one for not seeing or not making
amends for (an offence) or for not giving up (a wrong view).⁴
32. Two grounds for belonging to the same communion: either of BD 6.179
oneself one makes oneself belong to the same communion,⁵ Vin 5.117
or the Order restores one who was suspended for not seeing
or not making amends for (an offence) or for not giving up (a
wrong view).⁶
33. Two (groups of) offences involving Defeat: for monks and for
nuns


34. Two (groups of) offences entailing a Formal Meeting of the
Order.
35. Two (groups of) grave offences.
36. Two of offences of Expiation.
37. Two of offences to be confessed.
38. Two of wrong-doing.
39. Two of wrong speech: for monks and for nuns.
40. Seven offences, seven classes of offence.¹
41. An Order is split by two methods: by a (formal) act² or by a
voting-ticket.³
42. Two individuals should not be ordained: one lacking the full
age,⁴ one lacking a limb.⁵
43. And two further individuals should not be ordained: one who
has fallen away from the matter,⁶ and the karaṇadukkaṭaka.⁷
44. And two further individuals should not be ordained: he who is
not complete,⁸ and he who is complete but has not asked.⁹
45. One should not live in dependence on two individuals: on an
unconscientious one¹⁰ nor on an ignorant one.¹¹
46. Guidance should not be given by two individuals: by an unconscientious
one¹² and by a conscientious one if one has not
requested him.¹³
47. Guidance should be given to two individuals: the ignorant one


and the conscientious one if he requests.¹
48. Two individuals are incapable of falling into an offence: Bud- BD 6.180
dhas and Hermit Buddhas.
49. Two individuals are capable of falling into an offence: monks
and nuns.
50. Two individuals are incapable of consciously falling into an
offence: the ariyan individuals who are monks and nuns.
51. Two individuals are capable of consciously falling into an offence:
ordinary individuals who are monks and nuns.
52. Two individuals are incapable of consciously transgressing a
matter that goes too far²: ariyan individuals who are monks
and nuns.
53. Two individuals are capable of consciously transgressing a
matter that goes too far: ordinary individuals who are monks
and nuns.
54. Two kinds of protest: one protests by means of the body, one
protests by means of speech.³
55. There are two (kinds of) being sent away⁴: there is the individual
who has not arrived at the point of being sent away but
who, if the Order sends him away, is sometimes rightly sent
away, sometimes wrongly sent away.⁵
56. Two kinds of restoration⁶: there is the individual who has not
arrived at the point of being restored but who, if the Order restores
him, is sometimes rightly restored, sometimes wrongly
restored.⁷
57. Two acknowledgements: either he acknowledges by body or
he acknowledges by speech.⁸
58. Two acceptances: either he accepts by body⁹ or he accepts by


means of something attached to the body.¹
59. Two objectings to²: either he objects by body or he objects by
speech.
60. Two harmings: harming to the training and harming to possessions.
³
61. Two reprovings: either he reproves by body or he reproves by
speech.⁴
62. Two impediments to (the removal of) the kaṭhina privileges: BD 6.181
the residence-impediment and the robes-impediment.⁵
63. Two non-impediments to (the removal of) the kaṭhina privileges:
the residence-non-impediment and the robes-non- impediment.
⁶
64. Two (kinds of) robe-material: that (given by) householders⁷
and the rag-heap (robe-material).⁸
65. Two (kinds of) bowl: the iron bowl, the clay bowl.⁹
66. Two (kinds of) circular (bowl-rests¹⁰): made of tin, made of
lead.¹¹
67. Two (kinds of) allottings of a bowl¹²: either one allots by body
or one allots by speech.
68. Two (kinds of) allottings of a robe: either one allots by body or Vin 5.118
one allots by speech.¹³


69. Two (kinds of) assignment: assignment in the presence of and
assignment in the absence of.¹
70. Two disciplines: for monks and for nuns.
71. Two things belonging to discipline²: what has been laid down
and what is in conformity with what has been laid down.³
72. Two subduings of discipline: bridge-breaking in regard to what
is not allowable, behaving with moderation in regard to what
is allowable.⁴
73. In two ways one falls into an offence: one falls by means of
body and one falls by means of speech.⁵
74. In two ways one rises from an offence: one rises by means of
body and one rises by means of speech.⁶
75. Two probations: probation for concealing, probation for not BD 6.182
concealing.⁷
76. And two further probations: purifying probation,⁸ concurrent
probation.⁹
77. Two mānattas: mānatta for concealing, mānatta for not concealing.
¹⁰
78. And two further mānattas: mānatta for a fortnight,¹concur-


rent mānatta.¹
79. For two kinds of individuals there is an interruption²: for him
who is under probation³ and for him who is undergoing mānatta.
⁴
80. Two disrespects: disrespect for a person and disrespect for
Dhamma.⁵
81. Two salts: the natural and the made.⁶
82. And two further salts: sea(-salt), black salt.⁷
83. And two further salts: rock-salt, culinary salt.⁸
84. And two further salts: the “Sambhar Lake” (salt),⁹ pakkhālaka.¹⁰
85. Two enjoyments: inner enjoyment and outer enjoyment.¹¹
86. Two modes of address: low mode of address and high mode of
address.¹²
87. In two ways is there slander: in making dear or in desiring BD 6.183
dissension.¹³
88. In two ways is a group-meal entered upon: by being invited or


by asking.¹
89. Two (periods for) beginning the rains: the earlier and the
later.²
90. Two suspensions of the Pātimokkha are not legally valid.³
91. Two suspensions of the Pātimokkha are legally valid.⁴
92. Two foolish men⁵: he who carries out a task unasked and he
who, when asked, does not carry out a task.⁶
93. Two wise men: he who does not carry out a task unasked and
he who, when asked, carries out a task.
94. And two further foolish men: he who thinks what is allowable
is in what is not allowable and he who thinks what is not
allowable is in what is allowable.
95. Two wise men: he who thinks what is not allowable is in what
is not allowable and he who thinks what is allowable is in what
is allowable.⁷
96. And two further foolish men: he who thinks there is an offence
in what is not an offence and he who thinks there is not an
offence in an offence.
97. Two wise men: he who thinks there is an offence in an offence
and he who thinks there is not an offence in what is not an
offence.
98. And two further foolish men: he who thinks there is Dhamma
in what is not-dhamma and he who thinks there is not-dhamma
in Dhamma.
99. Two wise men: he who thinks there is not-dhamma in not-dhamma
and he who thinks there is Dhamma in Dhamma.


100. And two further foolish men: he who thinks there is not-discipline
in Discipline and he who thinks there is Discipline in notdiscipline.
101. Two wise men: he who thinks there is not-discipline in notdiscipline
and he who thinks there is Discipline in Discipline.
102. Of two individuals the cankers grow: he who is remorseful
when he should not be remorseful and he who is not remorseful
when he should be remorseful.BD 6.184
Vin 5.119 103. Of two individuals the cankers do not grow: he who is not
remorseful when he should not be remorseful and he who is
remorseful when he should be remorseful.
104. And of two further individuals the cankers grow: he who thinks
what is allowable is in what is not allowable and he who thinks
what is not allowable is in what is allowable.
105. Of two individuals the cankers do not grow: he who thinks
what is not allowable is in what is not allowable and he who
thinks what is allowable is in what is allowable.
106. And of two further individuals the cankers grow: he who thinks
there is an offence in what is not an offence and he who thinks
there is not an offence in an offence.
107. Of two individuals the cankers do not grow: he who thinks
there is not an offence in what is not an offence and he who
thinks there is an offence in an offence.
108. And of two further individuals the cankers grow: he who thinks
that Dhamma is in not-dhamma and he who thinks there is notdhamma
in Dhamma.
109. Of two individuals the cankers do not grow: he who thinks
there is not-dhamma in not-dhamma and he who thinks there
is Dhamma in Dhamma.
110. And of two further individuals the cankers grow: he who thinks
there is not-discipline in Discipline and he who thinks there is
Discipline in not-discipline.
111. Of two individuals the cankers do not grow: he who thinks


there is not-discipline in not-discipline and he who thinks
there is Discipline in Discipline.
Concluded are the Dyads
its summary
Awareness, and acquirers, True Dhamma, and requisites, individuals,
Truth, the ground, while setting out, taking, undertaking, /
Doing, giving, accepting, through using, and by night,
Sunrise, cutting off, concealing, and wearing, Observances, /
Invitation, (formal) acts and further, matter, further ones, and defects,
And two further ones, excellence, different one, and just the same, /
Defeat, Order, grave offence, Expiation, Confession,¹
Wrong-doing, and also wrong speech, and seven classes of offence, / BD 6.185 Is split, ordination, similarly a further two,
Should not live, should not be given, incapable, and also capable, /
Consciously, and that go too far, protests, being sent away,
Restoration, and acknowledgement, acceptance, objecting to, /
He harms, and reprovings, kaṭhina, and similarly two,
Robes, bowls, what are circular, allottings, likewise two, /
And assignments, disciplines, and belonging to discipline, subduings,
And one falls, one rises from, probations, a further two, /
Two mānattas, and further, interruption, disrespect,
Two salts, a further three,² enjoyment, and by mode of address, /
And slander, groups, the rains, suspensions, tasks, allowable,
No offence, non-dhamma, Dhamma, in Discipline, similarly the cankers.

3. Triads
Prv 7.3.1 1. There is the offence one falls into while the Lord is alive, not
after the parinibbāna³; there is the offence one falls into after


the parinibbāna, not while the Lord is alive¹; there is the offence Vin 5.120
one falls into both while the Lord is alive as well as after the
parinibbāna.
2. There is the offence one falls into at a right time, not at a wrong
time; there is the offence one falls into at a wrong time, not at
a right time; there is the offence one falls into at a right time BD 6.186
as well as at a wrong time.²
3. There is the offence one falls into during the night, not by day
… by day, not during the night … during the night as well as by
day.³
4. There is the offence that one of ten years’ standing falls into,
not one of less than ten years’ standing⁴; there is the offence
that one of less than ten years’ standing falls into, not one of
ten years’ standing; there is the offence that one of ten years’
standing and one of less than ten years’ standing fall into.
5. There is the offence that one of five years’ standing falls into,
not one of less than five years’ standing⁵; there is the offence
that one of less than five years’ standing falls into, not one of
five years’ standing; there is the offence that one of five years’
standing and one of less than five years’ standing fall into.
6. There is the offence that one of skilled mind falls into⁶; there is


the offence that one of unskilled mind falls into¹; there is the
offence that one of indeterminate mind falls into.²
7. There is the offence that one having a pleasant feeling falls
into³; there is the offence that one having a painful feeling falls
into⁴; there is the offence that one having neither a painful nor
a pleasant feeling falls into.⁵
8. Three grounds for reproof according to what has been seen,
heard, or suspected.⁶
9. Three methods of taking votes: the secret, the open, and whispering
in the ear.⁷
10. Three objections⁸: (to) great wishes,⁹ discontent, unsubduedness.
BD 6.187
11. Three permissions: small wishes,¹⁰ content, subduedness. And
three further objections: (to) great wishes, discontent, immoderation.
¹¹
12. Three permissions: small wishes, content, moderation.¹²
13. Three layings down: a laying down, a supplementary laying
down, a laying down that has not yet occurred.¹³
14. And three further layings down: a laying down (that holds
good) everywhere, a laying down (that holds good only) for
some regions, a laying down that is shared.
15. And three further layings down: a laying down that is not
shared, a laying down for one (Order only), a laying down
for both (Orders).
16. There is the offence an ignorant person falls into, not the wise


man¹; there is the offence the wise man falls into, not the ignorant
person; there is the offence the ignorant person falls into
as well as the wise man.
17. There is the offence one falls into on the next new-moon day,
not on the next full-moon day² … on the next full-moon day,
not the next new-moon day³ … on the next new-moon day as
well as on the next full-moon day.
18. There is what is allowed on the next new-moon day, not on the
next full-moon day⁴; … on the next full-moon day, not on the
next new-moon day⁵ … on the next new-moon day as well as
on the next full-moon day.
19. There is the offence one falls into in the cold weather, not in
the hot weather, not in the rains⁶ … in the hot weather, not in
the cold weather, not in the rains⁷ … in the rains, not in the
cold weather, not in the hot weather.⁸
20. There is the offence an Order falls into, not a group, not an in- BD 6.188
dividual⁹ … a group falls into, not an Order, not an individual¹⁰
… an individual falls into, not an Order, not a group.¹¹
21. There is what is allowed for an Order, not for a group, not for
an individual¹²; there is what is allowed for a group, not for an


Order, not for an individual¹; there is what is allowed for an
individual, not for an Order, not for a group.²
22. Three concealings: one conceals the subject, not the offence;
one conceals the offence, not the subject; one conceals the subject
as well as the offence.³
23. Three coverings: a covering to the bathroom, a covering to the
water, a covering by clothes.⁴
24. Three things are hidden, not open⁵: women-folk practise (their
ways) in concealment, not openly; the mantras of brahmins are
practised in concealment, not openly; a false view is practised Vin 5.121
in concealment, not openly.
25. Three things shine forth when they are unveiled, not in concealment⁶:
the moon’s disc shines forth when it is unveiled, not
when it is hidden; the sun’s disc … not when it is hidden; the
Dhamma-and-Discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata shines
forth when it is unveiled, not when it is hidden.
26. Three times for the appropriation of lodgings: the earlier, the
later, the intervening.⁷
27. There is the offence one who is ill falls into, not one who is not
ill⁸; there is the offence one who is not ill falls into, not one
who is ill⁹; there is the offence one who is ill falls into as well BD 6.189
as one who is not ill.¹⁰
28. Three suspensions of the Pātimokkha are not legally valid.¹¹
29. Three suspensions of the Pātimokkha are legally valid.¹²
30. Three probations: concealed probation,¹³ unconcealed probation,
¹⁴ purifying probation.¹⁵


31. Three mānattas: concealed mānatta,unconcealed mānatta,²
the mānatta for a fortnight.³
32. Three interruptions for a monk who is under probation: dwelling
with, dwelling away separated from, not announcing.⁴
33. There is the offence one falls into inside, not outside⁵; there
is the offence one falls into outside, not inside⁶; there is the
offence one falls into inside as well as outside.
34. There is the offence one falls into inside a boundary, not outside
a boundary⁷; there is the offence one falls into outside a
boundary, not inside a boundary⁸; there is the offence one falls
into inside a boundary as well as outside a boundary.
35. By three ways does one fall into an offence: one falls by means
of body … by means of speech … by means of body, by means
of speech.
36. By three further ways does one fall into an offence: in the midst
of an Order,⁹ in the midst of a group,¹⁰ in the presence of an
individual.¹¹
37. In three ways does one arise from an offence: one arises by
means of body, one arises by means of speech, one arises by
means of body, by means of speech.¹²
38. By three further ways does one arise from an offence: in the
midst of an Order, in the midst of a group, in the presence of
an individual.¹³
39. Three givings of a verdict of past insanity are not legally valid.¹⁴
40. Three givings of a verdict of past insanity are legally valid.¹⁵
41. An Order, if it so desires, may carry out a (formal) act of censure
against a monk who is possessed of three qualities: if he is a
maker of strife, a maker of quarrels, a maker of disputes a


maker of contention, a maker of legal questions in an Order; if
he is ignorant, inexperienced, full of offences not rid of them;
if he lives in company with householders in inappropriate
association with householders.¹
42. An Order, if it So desires, may carry out a (formal) act of guidance
… association with householders.²
43. An Order, if it so desires, may carry out a (formal) act of banishment
against a monk who is possessed of three qualities: if
he is a maker of strife … a maker of legal questions in an Order;
if he is ignorant … not rid of them; if he brings a family into
disrepute, is of depraved conduct, and if his depraved conduct
is seen and also heard.³
44. An Order, if it so desires, may carry out a (formal) act of reconciliation
against a monk who is possessed of three qualities: if
he is a maker of strife … if he is ignorant … not rid of them; if
he reviles and abuses householders.⁴
45. An Order, if it so desires, may carry out a (formal) act of suspension
against a monk … for not seeing an offence … if he is a Vin 5.122
maker of strife … not rid of them; if (though) he has fallen into
an offence he does not wish to see the offence.⁵
46. An Order, if it so desires, may carry out a (formal) act of suspension
against a monk … for not making amends for an offence
… if he is a maker of strife … not rid of them: if (though) he has
fallen into an offence he does not wish to make amends for the
offence.⁶
47. An Order, if it so desires, may carry out a (formal) act of suspension
against a monk who is possessed of three qualities for
not giving up a pernicious view: if he is a maker of strife … not
rid of them; if he does not wish to give up the pernicious view.⁷
48. An Order, if it so desires, may plan something hard⁸ for a monk


who is possessed of three qualities: if he is a maker of strife …
not rid of them; if he lives in company with householders, in
inappropriate association with householders.
49. A (formal) act may be carried out against a monk who is possessed
of three qualities: if he is unconscientiousand if he is BD 6.191
ignorant² and if he is not a regular (monk).³
50. And a (formal) act may be carried out against a monk who is
possessed of three further qualities: if, in regard to morality,
he has fallen away from moral habit⁴; if, in regard to behaviour,
he has fallen away from right behavior⁵; if, in regard to view,
he has fallen away from right view.⁶
51. And a (formal) act may be carried out against a monk who is
possessed of three further qualities: if he is possessed of bodily
frivolity, if he is possessed of verbal frivolity, if he is possessed
of bodily and verbal frivolity.⁷
52. And … who is possessed of three further qualities: if he is possessed
of bodily bad behaviour … verbal bad behaviour … bodily
and verbal bad behaviour.⁸
53. And … who is possessed of three further qualities: if he is possessed
of harming by means of body … harming by means of
speech … harming by means of body and speech.⁹
54. And … who is possessed of three further qualities: if he is pos-


sessed of a wrong bodily mode of livelihood … a wrong verbal
mode of livelihood … a wrong bodily and verbal mode of livelihood.
¹
55. And … who is possessed of three further qualities: if, having
fallen into an offence and a (formal) act has been carried out
against him, he ordains, gives guidance, makes a novice attend
him.²
56. And … who is possessed of three further qualities: if he falls
into that same offence for which a (formal) act was carried out BD 6.192
(against him) by an Order, or into another that is similar, or
into one that is worse.³
57. And … who is possessed of three further qualities: if he speaks
dispraise of the Buddha of Dhamma … of the Order.⁴
58. If a monk is possessed of three qualities: if he is unconscientious
and if he is ignorant and if he is not a regular monk (but
if) he has suspended the Observance in the midst of an Order
(but if other monks) have snubbed him, saying: “That’s
enough, monk; let there be no strife, no quarrel, no dispute, no
contention,” the Observance may be carried out by the Order.⁵
59. If a monk is possessed of three qualities … there may be Invitation
by the Order.⁶
60. No agreement of an Order should be given to a monk who is
possessed of three qualities: if he is unconscientious … not a
regular monk.⁷
61. If a monk is possessed of three qualities he should not speak⁸
in the Order: if he is unconscientious … not a regular monk.
62. A monk who is possessed of three qualities should not be put
in any separate place⁹; if he is unconscientious … not a regular


monk.
63. If a monk is possessed of three qualities he should not live Vin 5.123
in dependence … If a monk is possessed of three qualities he
should not give guidance: if he is unconscientious … not a
regular monk.
64. If a monk who is possessed of three qualities obtains leavethe
giving of the leave is not sufficient: if he is unconscientious …
not a regular monk.
65. If a monk is possessed of three qualities he should not issue
commands²: if he is unconscientious … not a regular monk.
66. If a monk is possessed of three qualities he should not ask about
Discipline³ … not a regular monk.
67. Discipline should not be asked about by means of monk who is
possessed of three qualities⁴: … not a regular monk. BD 6.193
68. (Questions on) Discipline should not be answered by a monk
who is possessed of three qualities⁵: … not a regular monk.
69. (Questions on) Discipline should not be answered through a
monk who is possessed of three qualities⁶: … not a regular
monk.
70. An explanation should not be given to a monk who is possessed
of three qualities⁷: … not a regular monk.
71. Discipline should not be discussed together with a monk who
is possessed of three qualities⁸: … not a regular monk.
72. One should not be ordained by a monk who is possessed of
three qualities⁹: … not a regular monk.
73. Guidance should not be given to¹⁰ a monk who is possessed of
three qualities: … not a regular monk.
74. A novice should not be made to attend on a monk who is possessed
of three qualities¹¹: if he is unconscientious and ignorant
and not a regular monk.


75. Three Observances: on the fourteenth (day), the fifteenth (day),¹
and the Observance of “being all together”.²
76. And three further Observances: Observance in an Order,³ Observance
in a group,⁴ Observance for an individual.⁵
77. And three further Observances: the Observance at which the
rules are recited,⁶ the Observance at which there is entire purity,
⁷ the Observance where there is determination.⁸
78. Three Invitations: the fourteenth (day), the fifteenth (day),⁹
and the Invitation of “being all together”.¹⁰
79. And three further Invitations: Invitation in an Order,¹Invitation
in a group,¹² Invitation for an individual.¹³
80. And three further Invitations: Invitation by the threefold formula,
¹⁴ Invitation by the twofold formula,¹⁵ Invitation of those
keeping the rains (all) together.
81. Three (persons) doomed to the Downfall, to Niraya¹⁶: he who,
not getting rid of this,¹⁷ is not a Brahma-farer though pretending
to be a Brahma-farer; and he who, though not a pure BD 6.194
Brahma-farer, makes an unfounded charge of non-Brahma
faring against one who is faring a pure Brahma-faring¹⁸; and
he who speaks like this and is of this view: “There is no defect
in sense-pleasures” comes to indulgence among the sensepleasures.
¹⁹
82. Three roots of unskill: greed is a root of unskill, hatred is a root
of unskill, confusion is a root of unskill.
83. Three roots of skill: non-greed is a root of skill, non-hatred is a
root of skill, non-confusion is a root of skill.
84. Three ways of bad behavior: bad behaviour through body, bad


behaviour through speech, bad behaviour through thought.
85. Three ways of good behavior: good behaviour through body …
speech … thought.
86. Dependent on three reasons was a meal (to be eaten) by a triad
(of monks) laid down by the Lord: for the restraint of evilminded
individuals; for the living in comfort of well-behaved
monks lest those of evil desires should split an Order by means
of a faction; and out of compassion for families.Vin 5.124
87. Devadatta, overcome and his mind controlled by three bad
qualities is doomed to the Downfall, to Niraya, staying there
for an aeon, incurable: evil desire, evil friendship, coming to a
halt midway in his career because his special attainments are
of trifling value.²
88. Three agreements: agreement as to a walking staff ³; agreement
as to string⁴; agreement as to a walking staff and string.⁵
89. Three (kinds of) shoes that are in fixed places and cannot be
handed on: privy shoes, urinal shoes, rinsing shoes.⁶
90. Three (kinds of) foot-rubbers: a stone, a pebble, sea-scum.⁷
Concluded are the Triads
its summary
While he is alive, at the right time,
and during the night, ten, five, through skill,
Feeling, grounds for reproof,
votes, twice objections, /
Layings down, and two further, ignorant,
and at the next new-moon day, is allowed, BD 6.195 In the cold weather, an Order, for an Order,
and concealings, a covering, /
Things hidden, and unveiled, lodgings, those who are ill,
The Pātimokkha, probation, mānattas, those under probation, /
Inside, and inside a boundary, does one fall, and again further,
Does one arise, and further too,
verdicts for past insanity are twofold, /
(Act of) censure, and of guidance,


of banishment, reconciliation,
Not seeing, not making amends for,
and not giving up a (wrong) view, /
Something hard, (formal) act,
as to the higher morality,
frivolity, bad behaviour, harming,
Mode of livelihood, having fallen, that same (offence),
dispraise, and about Observance, /
Invitation, and agreement,
remaining, and in a separate (place),
He should not speak, he should not give,
likewise he should not get leave, /
He should not issue commands,
two on what should not be asked about,
And similarly two on he should not answer,
and he should not be given an explanation, /
Discussion, ordination, guidance, and novices,
Three triads on Observance, three triads on Invitation, /
(Persons in) the Downfall, unskilled, skilled, two on behaviour,
A meal by a triad, bad qualities, agreement, and about shoes,
Similarly things that are foot-rubbers:
this is the summary for the Triads.
4. Tetrads
Prv 7.4.1 1. There is the offence one falls into through one’s own speech,
rises from through another’s speech¹; there is the offence one BD 6.196
falls into through another’s speech, rises from through one’s
own speech²; there is the offence one falls into through one’s
own speech, rises from through one’s own speech³; there is



the offence one falls into through another’s speech, rises from
through another’s speech.¹
2. There is the offence one falls into by body, rises from by speech:
… falls into by speech, rises from by body … falls into by body,
rises from by body falls into by speech, rises from by speech.²
3. There is the offence one falls into when one is asleep,³ rises
from when one is awake; … when one is awake, rises from Vin 5.125
when one is asleep … asleep, asleep … awake, awake.
4. There is the offence one falls into unconscious⁴ (that it is against
ordinance), rises from conscious (that it is against ordinance);
… conscious unconscious …; unconscious … unconscious; there
is the offence one falls into conscious (that it is against ordinance),
rises from conscious (that it is against ordinance).
5. There is the offence that, falling into, he confesses, confessing
he falls into; there is the offence that, falling into he rises from,
rising from he falls into.⁵
6. There is the offence one falls into through doing, rises from
through not doing … falls into through not doing, rises from
through doing … falls into through doing, rises from through
doing … falls into through not doing, rises from through not


doing.¹
BD 6.197 7. Four unariyan statements²: speaking of the seen as unseen,
speaking of the heard as unheard, speaking of the sensed as
unsensed, speaking of the cognized as uncognized.
8. Four ariyan statements³: speaking of the unseen as unseen …
of the uncognized as uncognized.
9. And four further unariyan statements⁴: speaking of the unseen
as seen, speaking of the unheard as heard, speaking of the
unsensed as sensed, speaking of the uncognized as cognized.
10. Four ariyan statements⁵: speaking of the seen as seen … the
cognized as cognized.
11. Four offences involving Defeat are shared by monks and nuns.
12. Four offences involving Defeat are not shared by monks and
nuns.⁶
13. Four requisites: there is the requisite that should be guarded,
protected, cherished, made use of ⁷; there is the requisite that
should be guarded, protected, not cherished, made use of; there
is the requisite that should be guarded, protected, not cherished,
not made use of; there is the requisite that should not
be guarded, not protected, not cherished, not made use of.
14. There is the offence one falls into in the presence of, rises from
in the absence of ⁸; there is the offence one falls into in the
absence of, rises from in the presence of ⁹; … falls into in the


presence of, rises from in the presence of ¹; there is the offence
one falls into in the absence of, rises from in the absence of.²
15. There is the offence one falls into unknowing, rises from knowing;
… falls into knowing, rises from unknowing falls into unknowing,
rises from unknowing; there is the offence one falls
into knowing, rises from knowing.³
16. By four means does one fall into an offence: one falls by body
… by speech … by body, by speech; one falls by a resolution.⁴ BD 6.198
17. And by four further means does one fall into an offence: in the
midst of an Order, in the midst of a group, in the presence of an
individual, through the appearance of a sexual characteristic.⁵
18. By four means does one rise from an offence: one rises by body
… by speech … by body, by speech; one rises by a resolution.
19. And by four further means does one rise from an offence: in the
midst of an Order, in the midst of a group in the presence of an
individual, through the appearance of a sexual characteristic.
Together with (its) acquisition he gets rid of the earlier, is
established in the later, hintings are allayed descriptions are
stopped.⁶ Together with (its) acquisition he gets rid of the later,
is established in the earlier, hintings are allayed, descriptions
are stopped.⁷
20. Four reprovings: one reproves for falling away from moral
habit, one reproves for falling away from good behaviour, one Vin 5.126
reproves for falling away from right views, one reproves for
falling away from right mode of livelihood.
21. Four probations: probation for concealing, probation for not
concealing, purifying probation, concurrent probation.⁸
22. Four mānattas: mānatta for concealing, mānatta for not concealing,
mānatta for a fortnight, concurrent mānatta.
23. Four interruptions for a monk who is undergoing mānatta:


dwelling with, dwelling away separated from, not announcing,
going about with less than a group.¹
24. Four things discovered of themselves.²
25. Four enjoyments (of food and so on, formally) accepted: for the
time being, for a watch of the night, for seven days, for as long
as life lasts.³
26. Four great irregular things: (a decoction of) dung, urine, ashes, BD 6.199
clay.⁴
27. Four (formal) acts: a (formal) act for which leave should be
asked, a (formal) act at which a motion is put, a (formal) act
at which a motion is put and is followed by one resolution,
a (formal) act at which a motion is put and is followed by a
resolution made three times.⁵
28. And four further (formal) acts: a (formal) act in an incomplete
(Order carried out) by what is not the rule; a (formal) act in a
complete (Order carried out) by what is not the rule; a (formal)
act in an incomplete (Order carried out) by the rule; a (formal)
act in a complete (Order carried out) by the rule.⁶
29. Four fallings away: falling away from moral habit … from good
behaviour … from right views … from right mode of livelihood.
30. Four legal questions: legal question concerning disputes …
censure … offences … obligations.⁷
31. Four defilements of an assembly: a monk who is poor in moral
habit, evil in character is a defilement of an assembly; a nun
… a lay follower … a female lay follower who is poor in moral
habit, evil in character is a defilement of an assembly.⁸


32. Four adornments of an assembly: a monk who is of moral habit,
lovely in character is an adornment of an assembly; a nun …
a lay follower … a female lay follower who is of moral habit,
lovely in character is an adornment of an assembly.¹
33. There is the offence an incoming (monk) falls into, not a resident
one²; there is the offence a resident (monk) falls into, not
an incoming one³; there is the offence a resident monk falls
into as well as an incoming one; there is the offence that neither
a resident (monk) falls into nor an incoming one. There is the
offence a (monk who is) going away falls into, not a resident
one⁴; there is the offence a resident (monk) falls into, not one
who is going away⁵ … there is the offence that neither one who
is going away nor a resident one falls into.
BD 6.200 34. There is difference as to matter, not difference as to offence⁶;
there is difference as to offence, not difference as to matter⁷;
there is difference as to matter as well as difference as to offence⁸;
there is difference neither as to matter nor as to offence.⁹
35. There is similarity as to matter, not similarity as to offence¹⁰;
there is similarity as to offence, not similarity as to matter¹¹;
there is similarity as to matter as well as similarity as to offence¹²;
there is similarity neither as to matter nor as to offence.¹³
36. There is the offence the preceptor falls into, not the one who


shares his cell¹; there is the offence one who shares a cell falls
into, not the preceptor²; there is the offence the preceptor falls
into as well as the one who shares his cell³; there is the offence
neither … falls into.
37. There is the offence the teacher falls into, not the pupil⁴ … there
is the offence neither the teacher nor the pupil falls into.
38. For four reasons there is no offence in cutting short the rains:
if the Order is split, or if there are those desirous of splitting
an Order,⁵ or if there is danger to life, or if there is danger to
the Brahma-faring.⁶
39. Four bad ways of verbal conduct: lying speech, slanderous
speech, harsh speech, gossip.⁷
40. Four good ways of verbal conduct: truthful speech, non-slanderous
speech, gentle speech, utterance of mantras.⁸ BD 6.201
41. There is, in taking, a serious offence that one falls into,⁹ a slight Vin 5.127
one in enjoining¹⁰; there is, in taking, a slight offence that one
falls into, a serious one in enjoining; there is, in taking and
in enjoining, a serious offence that one falls into; there is, in
taking and in enjoining, a slight offence that one falls into.
42. There is the individual who merits respectful greeting, does
not merit standing up for¹… standing up for, not respectful
greeting¹² … respectful greeting as well as standing up for¹³ …
merits neither respectful greeting nor standing up for.¹⁴
43. There is the individual who merits a seat, does not merit stand-


ing up for … who merits neither a seat nor standing up for.¹
44. There is the offence one falls into at a (right) time, not at a
wrong time² … at a wrong time,³ not at a right time … at a right
time as well as at a wrong time … neither at a right time nor at
a wrong time.
45. There is the formal acceptance⁴ allowable at a right time, not
at a wrong time⁵ … at a wrong time, not at a right time⁶ … at a
right time as well as at a wrong time⁷ … allowable neither at a
right time nor at a wrong time.⁸
46. There is the offence one falls into in the border districts,⁹ not
in the middle ones¹⁰ … in the middle districts, not in the border
ones¹… in the border districts as well as in the middle ones … BD 6.202
neither in the border districts nor in the middle ones.
47. There is what is allowable in the border districts, not in the middle
ones¹² … in the middle districts, not in the border ones¹³ …
in the border districts as well as in the middle ones¹⁴ … neither
in the border districts nor in the middle ones.
48. There is the offence one falls into inside, not outside¹⁵ … outside,
not inside¹⁶ … neither inside nor outside … inside as well as
outside.


49. There is the offence one falls into inside the boundary, not
outside the boundary… outside the boundary, not inside the
boundary … inside the boundary as well as outside the boundary
² … neither inside the boundary nor outside the boundary.
50. There is an offence one falls into in a village, not in a forest³ …
in a forest, not in a village⁴ … in a village as well as in a forest⁵
… neither in a village nor in a forest.
51. Four reproving⁶: showing the matter, showing the offence, objection
to living in communion, objection to the proper duties.
52. Four preliminary things to be done.⁷
53. Four occasions when things seem right.⁸
54. Four Expiations (containing the words) “not for another”.⁹
55. Four agreements of the monks.¹⁰
56. Four followings of a wrong course: he follows a wrong course BD 6.203
through partiality (desire) … through hatred … through confusion
… through fear.¹¹
57. Four non-followings of a wrong course: he does not follow a
wrong course through partiality … hatred … confusion … fear.
58. Possessed of four qualities an unconscientious monk, following
a wrong course through partiality … hatred … confusion … fear,
splits an Order.¹²


59. Possessed of four qualities a modest monk, not following a
wrong course through partiality … hatred … confusion … fear,
makes harmonious an Order that was split.¹
60. Discipline should not be asked about of a monk² who is possessed
of four qualities: if he follows a wrong course through
partiality … fear.³
61. Discipline should not be asked about by a monk⁴ who is possessed
of four qualities: if he follows a wrong course through
partiality … fear.⁵
62. Questions on Discipline should not be answered for a monk⁶
who is possessed of four qualities … should not be answered
by a monk⁷ who is possessed of four qualities: if he follows a
wrong course through partiality … fear.
63. An explanation should not be given to a monk⁸ who is possessed
of four qualities … Vin 5.128
64. Discipline should not be discussed together with a monk⁹ who
is possessed of four qualities: if he follows a wrong course
through partiality … fear.
65. There is an offence one who is ill falls into, not one who is not
ill¹⁰ … one who is not ill falls into, not one who is ill¹… one
who is ill falls into as well as one who is not ill¹² … neither one
who is ill falls into nor one who is not ill.
66. Four suspensions of the Pātimokkha are not legally valid.¹³
67. Four suspensions of the Pātimokkha are legally valid.¹⁴
Concluded are the Tetrads
its summary
Through one’s own speech, by body,
and asleep, unconscious,
And falling into, through doing,
statements are four likewise, /
And by monks and nuns,


and requisites, in the presence of,
Unknowing, by body, and by means,
one rises from is likewise fourfold, /
With the acquisition, reprovings,
and it is called probations
Mānatta, and undergoings too,
discovered by themselves, (formal) acceptance, /
Great irregular (things), (formal) acts,
again (formal) acts fallings away,
Legal questions, and those poor in moral habit,
adornment and on an incoming one, /
One going away, difference as to matter,
similarity, and about a preceptor,
Teacher, reason, bad conduct, good conduct, /
Taking, and individual,
one who merits, and about a seat,
At a (right) time, and also it is allowable,
and it is allowable in the border districts, /
Inside, and inside a boundary,
and in a village, and reprovings,
Preliminary duties, it seems right,
“not for another,” and agreements, /
A wrong course and not a wrong course too,
unconscientious, and about a modest one,
And two on whom may be asked,
likewise two on what one may answer,
Explanation, discussion, ill, and about suspension.
5. Pentads
Prv 7.5.1 1. Five offences.¹
2. Five classes of offence.²
3. Five matters that are trained in.³
4. Five deeds whose fruit comes with no delay.⁴
5. Five individuals who are certain.⁵
6. Five offences involving cutting down.⁶


7. In five ways does one fall into an offence.¹
8. Five offences due to lying speech.²
9. In five ways does it not become a (formal) act: either one does BD 6.205
not carry out a (formal) act by oneself, or one does not look
about for another (monk), or one does not give consent or
complete purity, or one protests when a (formal) act is being
carried out,³ or when there is the view that a (formal) act that
has been carried out is not legally valid.
10. In five ways does it become a (formal) act: either one carries
out a (formal) act by oneself, or one looks about for another
(monk), or one gives consent or complete purity, or one does
not protest when a (formal) act is being carried out, or when
there is the view that a (formal) act that has been carried out
is legally valid.
11. Five things are allowable to a monk who is an almsfood-eater⁴:
walking for alms without having asked for permission to do so,⁵
a group-meal,⁶ an out-of-turn-meal,⁷ no determining upon,⁸
no assigning.⁹
12. A monk who is possessed of five qualities,¹⁰ whether he be a Vin 5.129
depraved monk or one who is steady¹in morality is mistrusted
and suspected if his resort (for alms) is among prostitutes, or
among widows, or among grown girls, or among eunuchs, or


among nuns.
13. Five oils¹: sesamum oil, oil of mustard seed, oil from the “honeytree”,
² oil from the castor-oil plant, oil from tallow.
14. Five tallows: tallow from bears, tallow from fish, tallow from
alligators, tallow from swine, tallow from donkeys.³
15. Five losses: loss of relations, loss of possessions … by illness …
in moral habit, loss in (right) view.⁴
16. Five prosperities: prosperity in relations … possessions … health BD 6.206
… moral habit, prosperity in (right) view.⁵
17. Five nullifications of guidance from a preceptor: when preceptor
has gone away or left the Order or died or gone over to
another side (of the Order), and command is the fifth.⁶
18. Five persons should not be ordained: one lacking the full age,⁷ a
one lacking a limb,⁸ one who has fallen away from the matter,⁹
one who is a karaṇadukkaṭaka,¹⁰ one who is not complete.¹¹
19. Five refuse-rag-robes¹²: (rags thrown out) in a charnel-ground,
outside a shop, gnawn by rats, gnawn by white ants scorched
by fire. And five further refuse-rag-robes: (those) gnawn by
cattle, gnawn by goats, a robe from a shrine, one from a (king’s)
consecration, one worn going to or coming from (a charnelground).
20. Five carryings-away¹³: a carrying-away by theft¹⁴ … by force …
by stratagem … by concealment, a carrying-away at a casting
of the kusa-grass.¹⁵
21. Five great thieves are found in the world.¹⁶


22. Five things not to be disposed of.¹
23. Five things not to be divided up.²
24. Five offences originate by means of body, not by speech, not by
thought.³
25. Five offences originate by means of body and by means of
speech, not by means of thought.⁴
26. Five offences lead on to confession.⁵
27. Five Orders.⁶
28. Five (ways for) the recital of the Pātimokkha.⁷
29. Ordination may be conferred by a group with a Vinaya expert
as the fifth (member) in all border districts.⁸
30. Five advantages in the formal making of the kaṭhina-cloth.⁹
31. Five (formal) acts.¹⁰
32. Five offences (for which the offender may be admonished) up BD 6.207
to the third time.¹¹
33. There is an offence involving Defeat for in five ways taking
something that has not been given.¹²
34. There is a grave offence for … There is an offence of wrong doing
for in five ways taking something that has not been given.
35. Five unallowable things should not be made use of: what has
not been given, and what is not known about, and what is not
allowable, and what has not been formally accepted, and what
has not been made “left over”.¹³
36. Five allowable things may be made use of: what has been given
… and what has been made “left over”.
37. Five unmeritorious gifts are considered by the world to be


meritorious¹: a gift of intoxicants, a gift for a festival, a gift of
women, a gift of bulls, a gift of pictures.²
38. Five arisen things are hard to drive away³: attachment that has
arisen is hard to drive away, hatred … confusion … garrulousness⁴
… a mind that wanders⁵ when it has arisen is hard to
drive away.
39. There are five advantages in brooms⁶: one calms one’s own
mind, one calms the mind of others, devas are glad, one accu- Vin 5.130
mulates kamma that is conducive to what is pleasant, at the
breaking up of the body after dying one arises in a good bourn,
a heaven world.
40. Five further advantages in brooms: one calms one’s own mind
… devas are glad, the Teacher’s instruction is carried out, people
coming after fall into the way of (right) views.⁷
41. If he is possessed of five qualities an expert on Discipline is
reckoned as ignorant: if he does not put a limit to his own
speech, if he does not put a limit to the speech of another (person),
if, not having put a limit to his own speech, not having BD 6.208
put a limit to the speech of another (person), he has a (form act
carried out not according to the rule, not with (his) acknowledgement.
42. If he is possessed of five qualities an expert on Discipline is
reckoned as clever: if he puts a limit to his own speech … has
a (formal) act carried out according to the rule, with (his) acknowledgement.
43. And if he is possessed of five further qualities the expert on
Discipline is reckoned as ignorant: if he does not know what is


an offence,if he does not know what is the root of an offence,² if
he does not know the arising of an offence,³ if he does not know
the stopping of an offence,⁴ if he does not know the course
leading to the stopping of an offence.⁵
44. If he is possessed of five qualities an expert on Discipline is
reckoned as clever: if he knows what is an offence … if he knows
the course leading to the stopping of an offence.
45. And if he is possessed of five further qualities an expert on
Discipline is reckoned as ignorant: if he does not know what is
a legal question … the root⁶ … the arising⁷ … the stopping⁸ …
the course leading to the stopping of a legal question.⁹
46. If he is possessed of five qualities … reckoned as clever: If he
knows … the course leading to the stopping of a legal question.
47. And if he is possessed of five further qualities an expert on
Discipline is reckoned as ignorant: if he does not know the
subject¹⁰ … the provenance¹… the laying down¹² … the supplementary
laying down, if he does not know the sequence of the BD 6.209
connecting words.¹³
48. If he is possessed of five qualities an expert on Discipline is
reckoned as clever: if he knows the subject … the sequence of
the connecting words.


49. And if he is possessed of five further qualities an expert on
Discipline is reckoned as ignorant: if he does not know what is
a motion, if he does not know the carrying out of the motion,¹
if he is not skilled in what comes first,² if he is not skilled in
what comes afterwards, and if he is one who is unknowing of
the (right) time.³
50. If he is possessed of five qualities an expert on Discipline is
reckoned as clever: if he knows what is a motion … if he is
skilled in what comes afterwards, if he is one who is knowing
of the (right) time.
51. And if he is possessed of five further qualities an expert on
Discipline is reckoned as ignorant: if he does not know what is
an offence and what is not an offence, if he does not know what
is a slight and what a serious offence, if he does not know what
is an offence that can be done away with and one that cannot be
done away with,⁴ if he does not know what is a very bad offence
and one that is not very bad, if he has not learnt properly from
a succession of teachers, has not attended properly, has not
reflected on properly.
52. If he is possessed of five qualities an expert on Discipline is
reckoned as clever: if he knows what is an offence and what is
not an offence … if he has learnt properly from a succession of
teachers, has attended properly, has reflected on properly.
53. And if he is possessed of five further qualities an expert on
Discipline is reckoned as ignorant: if he does not know what is
an offence and what is not an offence, if he does not know what
is a slight and what a serious offence, if he does not know what
is an offence that can be done away with and one that cannot be
done away with, if he does not know what is a very bad offence
and one that is not very bad, and if the two Pātimokkhas have


not been properly handed down to him in detail, not properly
sectioned, not properly regulated, not properly investigated BD 6.210
clause by clause and in respect of the linguistic form.¹
54. If he is possessed of five qualities … clever: if … the two Pātimokkhas
have been properly handed down to him in detail,
properly section a properly regulated, properly investigated
clause by clause and in respect of the linguistic form.
55. And if he is possessed of five further qualities an expert on
Discipline is reckoned as ignorant if he does not know what is
an offence and what is not an offence … if he does not know
what is a very bad offence and one that is not very bad, and
if he is not skilled in investigating² a legal question. If he is
possessed of five qualities … clever: … and if he is skilled in
investigating a legal question.
56. Five forest-dwellers³: one is a forest-dweller from stupidity
from confusion; one of evil desires, filled with covetousness is
a forest-dweller; one is a forest-dweller from madness, from
a deranged mind; one is a forest-dweller at the thought, “It is
praised by Buddhas and disciples of Buddhas”; one is a forestdweller
because he is of few wishes, because of contentment,
because of subduedness, because of aloofness, because this is
of good avail.
57. Five almsfood-eaters …
58. Five refuse-rag-wearers …
59. Five tree-root-dwellers …
60. Five charnel-ground-dwellers …
61. Five open-air-dwellers …
62. Five three-robe-wearers …
63. Five house-to-house-seekers …
64. Five who are sitters …
65. Five who use any bed …
66. Five eaters at one session …


67. Five refusers of food later …
68. Five who eat bowl-food: … one is a bowl-food-eater from stupidity
… because this is of good avail.
69. A monk who is possessed of five qualities should not live independently
¹: if he does not know the Observance, if he does not
know the (formal) acts for Observance,² if he does not know
the Pātimokkha, if he does not know the recital of the Pātimokkha,
³ if it is less than five years (since his ordination).
70. A monk who is possessed of five qualities may live independently:
if he knows the Observance … if it is five years or more
than five years (since his ordination).⁴
71. And a monk who is possessed of five further qualities should BD 6.211
not live independently: if he does not know the Invitation, if he
does not know the (formal) acts for Invitation,⁵ if he does not
know the Pātimokkha, if he does not know the recital of the
Pātimokkha, if it is less than five years (since his ordination).
72. A monk who is possessed of five qualities may live independently:
… if it is five years or more than five years (since his
ordination).
73. And a monk who is possessed of five further qualities should
not live independently: if he does not know what is an offence
and what is not an offence, if he does not know what is a slight
and what a serious offence, if he does not know what is an
offence that can be done away with and one that cannot be
done away with, if he does not know what is a very bad offence
and one that is not very bad, if it is less than five years (since
his ordination).
74. A monk who is possessed of five qualities may live independently:
if he knows … what is and what is not a very bad offence,
if it is five years or more than five years (since his ordination).
75. A nun who is possessed of five qualities should not live independently:
if she does not know the Observance, if she does


not know the (formal) acts for Observance, if she does not
know the Pātimokkha, if she does not know the recital of the
Pātimokkha, if it is less than five years (since her ordination). Vin 5.132
76. A nun who is possessed of five qualities may live independently
… or more than five years (since her ordination).
77. And a nun who is possessed of five further qualities should not
live independently … (the same paragraphs as above repeated
for nuns) … if she knows what is and what is not a very bad
offence, and if it is five years or more than five years (since her
ordination).
78. Five perils for one of unpleasing (actions)¹: the self upbraids
the self, and the wise, having adjudicated,² blame him, an evil
Rumour spreads abroad (about him), he does his time while
he is confused, at the breaking up of the body after dying he
arises in a sorrowful way, a bad bourn, the Downfall, Niraya.
79. Five advantages for one of pleasing (actions)³: the self does not BD 6.212
upbraid the self, and the wise, having adjudicated, praise him,
a lovely rumour spreads abroad (about him), he does his time
while he is unconfused, at the breaking up of the body after
dying he arises in a good bourn, a heaven world.
80. And five further perils for one of unpleasing (actions)⁴: nonbelievers
are not pleased, there is wavering among some believers
the Teacher’s instruction is not carried out, people coming
after fall⁵ into the way of wrong views,⁶ his mind is not pleased.
81. Five advantages for one of pleasing (actions)⁷: non-believers
are pleased, there is increase of believers, the Teacher’s instruction
is carried out, people coming after do not fall⁸ into the way
of wrong views, his mind is pleased.
82. Five perils for one who is dependent on families⁹: he falls into
(the offence of) walking for alms without having asked for per-


mission,he falls into (the offence of) sitting down in private,²
he falls into (the offence of sitting down) on a concealed seat,³
he falls into (the offence of) teaching Dhamma to women in
more than five or six sentences,⁴ and he lives full of aspirations
after sense-pleasures.
83. Five perils for a monk who is dependent on families: living in
too much association with families there is a constant seeing
of the women-folk, if there is seeing there is contact,⁵ if there
is contact there is intimacy, if there is intimacy there is desire,
if his mind (is affected by) desire this may be expected for the
monk: either he will fare the Brahma-faring dissatisfied or he
will fall into some defiling⁶ offence or, disavowing the training,
he will revert to the secular life.⁷
84. Five kinds of propagation⁸: propagation from roots … from
stems … from joints … from cuttings, and fifthly propagation
from seeds.
85. Fruit that is in five ways allowable to recluses may be made
use of ⁹: if it is damaged¹⁰ by fire, damaged by a knife, damaged
by (one’s) nail, if it is seedless, and the fifth is if the seeds have BD 6.213
been discharged.
86. Five purifications¹¹: having recited the provenance, the rest
may be announced as though it had been heard (already): this
is the first purification; having recited the provenance, having
recited the four offences involving Defeat, the rest may be
announced as though it had been heard (already): this is the
second purification; having recited the provenance, having
recited the four offences involving Defeat, having recited the
thirteen offences entailing a Formal Meeting of the Order, the
rest may be announced as though it had been heard (already):
this is the third purification; having recited the provenance …


offences involving Defeat … entailing a Formal Meeting of the
Order, having recited the two Undetermined Offences, the rest Vin 5.133
may be announced as though it had been heard (already): this
is the fourth purification; recital in full is the fifth.
87. And five further purifications: recital of the rules,Observance
when there is entire purity,² Observance when there is determination,
³ Invitation, and the fifth is Observance with “being
all together”.
88. Five advantages for an expert in Discipline⁴: his own body of
moral habit is well guarded.well protected; he is a shelter for
those who are affected by scruples; confidently he lives in the
midst of an Order; with Dhamma he restrains adversaries (of
the Teaching)⁵ from one who is well restrained; he is one who
practises for the stability of True Dhamma.
89. Five suspensions of the Pātimokkha are not legally valid.⁶
90. Five suspensions of the Pātimokkha are legally valid.⁷
Concluded are the Pentads
its summary
Offence, classes of offence,
trained in, and with no delay,
Individuals, and also cutting down,
and he falls, due to, /
And it does not become, it becomes,
allowable, mistrusted, oil,
Tallow, loss, prosperity,
nullification, and as to a person, /
Charnel-ground, and gnawn by cattle, BD 6.214 theft, and he is called a thief,
Not to be disposed of, not to be divided up,
from body from body and speech, /
Confession, an Order, recital,
bordering, and about kaṭhina
(Formal) acts, up to the third time,
defeat, grave, wrong-doing, /


Unallowable, and allowable,
unmeritorious, hard to drive away,
Brooms, and a further (five),
speech, and also about an offence, /
Legal question, subject,
motion, offence, and the two,
These are slight (and) they are strong¹:
distinguish between the dark and the bright; /
Forest, and almsfood-eater,
refuse-rag, tree, charnel-ground-dwellers,
In the open air, and robe,
house-to-house, a sitter, /
Bed, refusers of food later,
and too the bowl-food-eater,
Observance, Invitation,
and also an offence and what is not an offence,
And similarly these dark and bright items are for nuns too, /
Unpleasing (person), pleasing,
likewise a further two,
Dependent on families, too much,
propagation, and allowable to recluses, /
Purification, and a further too,
Discipline, and not legally valid,
Likewise legally valid is spoken of:
concluded are the fair Pentads.
6. Sextets
Prv 7.6.1 1. Six forms of irreverence.²
2. Six forms of reverence.³
3. Six matters that are trained in.⁴
4. Six “proper courses”.⁵
5. Six originations of offences.⁶


6. Six offences involving cutting down.BD 6.215
7. In six ways does one fall into an offence.²
8. Six advantages for an expert in Discipline.³
9. Six “at most”.⁴
10. One may be away, separated from that robe for six nights.⁵
11. Six (kinds of) robe-material.⁶ Vin 5.134
12. Six (kinds of) dyes.⁷
13. Six offences originate from body and thought, not from speech.⁸
14. Six offences originate from speech and thought, not from body.
15. Six offences originate from body and speech and thought.
16. Six (formal) acts.⁹
17. Six roots of disputes.¹⁰
18. Six roots of censure.¹¹
19. In length six spans of the accepted span.¹²
20. In breadth six spans.¹³
21. Six nullifications of guidance from a teacher.¹⁴
22. Six supplementary layings down about bathing.¹⁵
23. Taking a robe that is imperfectly executed he goes away.¹⁶
24. Taking with him a robe that is imperfectly executed he goes
away.¹⁷
25. A monk who is possessed of six qualities may ordain, he may


give guidance, a novice may attend him: if he is possessed of an
adept’s body of moral habit … body of concentration … body of
wisdom … body of freedom … body of the vision and knowledge
of freedom, if he is of ten years’ standing or more than ten years’
standing.¹
26. And a monk who is possessed of six further qualities may ordain
… a novice may attend him: if he is possessed of an adept’s
body of moral habit and encourages another as to an adept’s
body of moral habit … if he is himself possessed of an adept’s
body of the vision and knowledge of freedom and encourages BD 6.216
another as to an adept’s body of the vision and knowledge of
freedom, if he is of ten years’ standing or more than ten years’
standing.²
27. And a monk who is possessed of six further qualities may ordain
… novice may attend him: if he comes to have faith, if he
comes to feel shame, if he comes to be cautious, if he comes
to be of stirred up energy, if he comes to be of ready mindfulness
if he is of ten years’ standing or of more than ten years’
standing.³
28. And a monk who is possessed of six further qualities may ordain
… a novice may attend him: if, in regard to moral habit,
he has not fallen away from moral habit; if, in regard to good
habits, he has not fallen away from good habits; if, in regard
to (right) view, he has not fallen away from right view; if he
has heard much; if he is intelligent; if he is … of more than ten
years’ standing.⁴
29. And a monk who is possessed of six further qualities may ordain
… a novice may attend him; if he is competent to tend or
get another to tend a pupil or one who shares a cell who is ill, to
allay or get another to allay dissatisfaction that has arisen, to
dispel or get another to dispel, by means of Dhamma, remorse
that has arisen, if he knows what is an offence, if he knows
the removal of an offence, if he is … of more than ten years’


standing.¹
30. And a monk who is possessed of six further qualities may ordain
… a novice may attend him: if he is competent to make
a pupil or one who shares a cell train in the training regarding
the fundamentals of conduct, to lead him in the training
regarding the fundamentals of the Brahma-faring, to lead him
in what pertains to Dhamma, to lead him in what pertains to
Discipline, to discuss or get another to discuss, by means of
Dhamma, a false view that has arisen, if he is of … more than
ten years standing.²
31. And a monk who is possessed of six further qualities may
ordain … a novice may attend him: if he knows what is an
offence, if he knows what is not an offence, if he knows what is
a slight offence, if he knows what is a serious offence, if the two
Pātimokkhas in full have been properly handed down to him,
properly sectioned, properly regulated, properly investigated
clause by clause and in respect of the linguistic form, if he is … BD 6.217
of more than ten years’ standing.³
32. Six suspensions of the Pātimokkha are not legally valid.⁴
33. Six suspensions of the Pātimokkha are legally valid.⁵
Concluded are the Sextets
its summary
Irreverences, and reverences,
trained in, and “proper courses” too,
Originations, and also cuttings down,
ways, and about advantage, /
And “at mosts”, six nights,
robe-material, and dyes,
Six too from body and mind,
as well as six from speech and mind, /
And from body, speech and mind,
(formal) acts, and also dispute,
Censure, and in length,
breadth, and about guidance, /
Supplementary layings down,


taking, and similarly taking with one,
Adepts, one who encourages,
faith, and in regard to moral habit,
Ill, fundamentals of conduct,
offence, not legally valid, legally valid.
7. Septets
Prv 7.7.1 1. Seven offences.¹
2. Seven classes of offence.²
3. Seven matters that are trained in.³
4. Seven “proper courses”.⁴
5. Seven carryings out on the acknowledgement of are not legally
valid.⁵
6. Seven carryings out on the acknowledgement of are legally
valid.⁶
7. There is no offence in going to seven (classes of people) if the
business can be done in seven days.⁷
8. Seven advantages for the expert in Discipline.⁸
9. Seven “at mosts”.⁹ Vin 5.135
10. It is to be forfeited at sunrise on the seventh day.¹⁰ BD 6.218
11. Seven decidings.¹¹
12. Seven (formal) acts.¹²
13. Seven raw grains.¹³
14. In breadth seven inside.¹⁴


15. Seven supplementary layings down for a group-meal.¹
16. After one has accepted medicines they may be used as a store
for at most seven days.²
17. Taking a robe that has been made up he goes away.³
18. Taking with him a robe that has been made up he goes away.⁴
19. There is not an offence of a monk’s that should be seen.⁵
20. There is an offence of a monk’s that should be seen.⁶
21. There is an offence of a monk’s for which amends should be
made.⁷
22. Seven suspensions of the Pātimokkha are not legally valid.⁸
23. Seven suspensions of the Pātimokkha are legally valid.⁹
24. A monk who is possessed of seven qualities is an expert on
Discipline: if he knows what is an offence, if he knows what
is not an offence; if he knows what is a slight offence, if he
knows what is a serious offence; if, possessed of moral habit,¹⁰
he lives controlled by the control of the Pātimokkha; if, possessed
of right conduct and resort, seeing danger in the slightest
faults, he, undertaking them, trains himself in the rules
of training; if he is one who acquires at will, without trouble,
without difficulty, the four meditations that are of the purest
mentality—abidings in ease here and now; and if, by the destruction
of the cankers, he, having realized here and now by
his own super-knowledge the freedom of mind and the freedom
through wisdom that are cankerless, enters and abides
therein.
25. And if a monk is possessed of seven further qualities he is an
expert on Discipline: if he knows what is an offence … if he
knows what is a serious offence; if he is one who has heard
much, remembers what he has heard, stores up what he has
heard—those things, lovely in the beginning, lovely in the middle,
lovely at the ending which, with the meaning and the spirit


declare the Brahma-faring wholly fulfilled, perfectly purified,
such things are much heard by him, borne in mind, familiarized
by speech, pondered over in the mind, and are well penetrated
by right view¹; if he is one who acquires at will … enters
and abides therein.
26. And if a monk is possessed of seven further qualities he is an
expert on Discipline: … if he knows what is a serious offence;
if the two Pātimokkhas have been properly handed down to
him in detail, properly sectioned, properly regulated, properly
investigated clause by clause and in respect of the linguistic
form; if he is one who acquires at will … enters and abides
therein.
27. And if a monk is possessed of seven further qualities he is an
expert on Discipline: if he knows … what is a serious offence;
if he recollects a variety of former habitations, that is to say
one birth and two births …² … thus he recollects a variety of
former habitations in all their modes and in detail; if with devalike
vision surpassing that of men, he sees beings as they are
passing hence …³ … thus with the deva-like vision surpassing
that of men does he see beings as they are passing hence and
coming to be—mean, excellent, fair, foul, and he comprehends
that beings are in a good bourn, in a bad bourn according to
kamma; and if, by the destruction of the cankers … he enters
and abides therein.
28. And if a monk is possessed of seven further qualities … he Vin 5.136
shines as an expert on Discipline … (here and following read he
shines as an expert on Discipline instead of he is an expert on
Discipline, and repeat the foregoing paragraphs exactly) … abides
therein.
29. Seven bad conditions: if one is lacking in faith, is without conscience,
is without shame, is one who has heard little, is lazy,
is of muddled mindfulness, and is one weak in wisdom.⁴


30. Seven right conditions: if one has faith, is conscientious, is
scrupulous, is one who has heard much, is one whose energy
is stirred up, is one whose mindfulness is raised up, and is one
full of wisdom.¹
Concluded are the Septets
its summary BD 6.220 Offence, classes of offence, trained in, and “proper courses” too,
Not legally valid, and legally valid, and no offence if within seven days, /
Advantages, “at mosts,” sunrise, and about deciding,
(Formal) acts, and raw grains, inside, for a group-meal, /
For at most seven days, taking, and similarly taking with him,
There is not, there is, and there is, not legally valid, and legally valid, /
Four experts² on Discipline, and four shining monks,³
And seven wrong conditions too, seven right conditions are taught.
8. Octets
Prv 7.8.1 1. That monk should not be suspended for not seeing an offence
by one possessed of eight advantages.⁴
2. That offence should be confessed even out of faith in others if
they are possessed of eight advantages.⁵
3. Eight “up to the third time”.⁶
4. In eight ways does one bring a family into disrepute.⁷
5. Eight headings for the accruing of robe-material.⁸
6. Eight headings for the withdrawing of the kaṭhina (privileges).⁹
7. Eight kinds of drinks.¹⁰
8. Devadatta, overcome and his mind controlled by eight bad
conditions, is doomed to the Downfall, to Niraya, staying there
for an aeon, incurable.¹¹


9. Eight things belonging to the world.¹
10. Eight important rules.²
11. Eight matters that should be confessed.³
12. Lying speech is eightfold.⁴ Vin 5.137
13. Eight factors for Observance.⁵
14. Eight factors for (going on) a message.⁶
15. Eight customs for members of other sects.⁷ BD 6.221
16. Eight marvellous and wonderful things about the great ocean.⁸
17. Eight marvellous and wonderful things in this Dhamma and
Discipline.⁹
18. Eight “not left overs”,¹⁰
19. Eight “left overs”.¹¹
20. It is to be forfeited on the eighth day at sunrise.¹²
21. Eight offences involving Defeat.¹³
22. Completing the eighth thing she should be expelled.¹⁴
23. By completing an eighth thing it is marked out even if not
(actually) marked out.¹⁵
24. Ordination having eight formulas.¹⁶
25. (Seats) should be risen from for eight nuns.¹⁷
26. A seat should be given to eight nuns.¹⁸
27. The woman lay disciple asked for eight boons.¹⁹


28. A monk who is possessed of eight qualities may be agreed upon
as an exhorter of nuns.¹
29. Eight advantages for an expert in Discipline.²
30. Eight “at mosts”.³
31. A monk against whom a (formal) act for specific depravity has
been carried out must act rightly in regard to eight things.⁴
32. Eight suspensions of the Pātimokkha are not legally valid.⁵
33. Eight suspensions of the Pātimokkha are legally valid.⁶
Concluded are the Octets
its summary
Not that monk, and in others,
up to the third time, bringing into disrepute,
Headings, removal of the kaṭhina (privileges),
drinks, and overcome by, /
Belonging to the world, important rules, BD 6.222 to be confessed lying,
Observances, factors for a message,
other sects, and in the sea, /
Wonderful, not left over,
left over, to be forfeited,
Defeats, the eighth thing,
not marked out, ordination, /
And too rising from a seat,
boon, and about an exhorter
Advantages, “at mosts,”
acting in regard to eight things
Not legally valid, and legally valid:
the Octets are well proclaimed.


9. Nonads
Prv 7.9.1 1. Nine occasions for ill-will.¹
2. Nine (ways of) averting ill-will.²
3. Nine matters that are trained in.³
4. Nine offences at once.⁴
5. An Order is split by nine (monks).⁵
6. Nine sumptuous foods.⁶
7. In (eating) nine kinds of meat there is an offence of wrong–
doing.⁷
8. Nine recitals of the Pātimokkha.⁸
9. Nine “at mosts”.
10. Nine things rooted in craving.⁹
11. Ninefold pride.¹⁰
12. Nine robes may be allotted.¹¹
13. Nine robes should not be assigned.
14. In length nine spans of the accepted span.¹²
15. Nine gifts are not legally valid.¹³
16. Nine recipients¹⁴ are not legally valid.
17. Nine enjoyments¹⁵ are not legally valid.
18. Three gifts are legally valid; three recipients are legally valid¹⁶;
three enjoyments¹⁷ are legally valid.


19. Nine (ways of) making known are not legally valid.BD 6.223
20. Nine (ways of) making known are legally valid.²
21. Two nonads for a (formal) act that is not legally valid.³ Vin 5.138
22. Two nonads for a (formal) act that is legally valid.⁴
23. Nine suspensions of the Pātimokkha are not legally valid.⁵
24. Nine suspensions of the Pātimokkha are legally valid.⁶
Concluded are the Nonads
its summary
Occasions for ill-will, averting,
trained in, and at once,
And is split, and sumptuous,
meat, recital, and “at mosts”, /
Craving, pride, allottings,
and assigned, spans,
Gifts, recipients, enjoyments,
and again the threefold when legally valid, /
Not legally valid, makings known that are legally valid,
and two nonads twice,
Suspensions of the Pātimokkha
that are and are not legally valid.
10. Decades
Prv 7.10.1 1. Ten occasions for ill-will.⁷
2. Ten (ways of) averting ill-will.⁸
3. Ten matters that are trained in.
4. A wrong view founded on ten (tenets).⁹
5. A right view founded on ten (tenets).¹⁰
6. Ten (ways of) taking up an extreme view.¹¹


7. Ten wrongnesses.¹
8. Ten rightnesses.²
9. Ten ways of unskilled action.³
10. Ten ways of skilled action.⁴
11. Ten distributions of voting tickets are not legally valid.⁵
12. Ten distributions of voting tickets are legally valid.⁶
13. Ten rules of training for novices.⁷
14. If he is possessed of ten qualities a novice should be expelled.⁸
BD 6.224 15. If he is possessed of ten qualities an expert on Discipline is reckoned
as ignorant: if he does not put a limit to his own speech, if
he does not put a limit to the speech of another (person), if, not
having put a limit to his own speech, to the speech of another
(person), he has a (formal) act carried out not according to
rule, not with his acknowledgement,⁹ if does not know what is
an offence, if he does not know what is the root of an offence,
if he does not know the arising … the stopping … the course
leading to the stopping of an offence.
16. If he is possessed of ten qualities an expert on Discipline is
reckoned as clever: if he puts a limit to his own speech … if he
knows what is an offence … the course leading to the stopping
of an offence.
17. And if he is possessed of ten further qualities an expert on
Discipline is reckoned as ignorant: if he does not know what
is a legal question … the root of a legal question … the arising
… the stopping … the course leading to the stopping of a legal
question, if he does not know the subject … the provenance
… the laying down … the supplementary laying down … the
sequence of the connecting words.¹⁰
18. If he is possessed of ten qualities an expert on Discipline is


reckoned as clever: if he knows what is a legal question … the
sequence of the connecting words.
19. And if he is possessed of ten further qualities an expert on Vin 5.139
Discipline is reckoned as ignorant: if he does not know what is
a motion, if he does not know the carrying out of a motion, if
he is not skilled in what comes first, if he is not skilled in what
comes afterwards, and if he is one unknowing of the (right)
time, if he does not know what is an offence and what is not an
offence, if he does not know a slight and a serious offence, if he
does not know what is an offence that can be done away with
and one that cannot be done away with, if he does not know
what is a very bad offence and one that is not very bad, if he
has not learnt properly from a succession of teachers, has not
attended properly, has not reflected on properly.¹
20. If he is possessed of ten qualities an expert on, Discipline is
reckoned as clever: if he knows what is a motion … if he has BD 6.225
learnt properly from a succession of teachers, has attended
properly, has reflected on properly.
21. And if he is possessed of ten further qualities an expert on
Discipline is reckoned as ignorant: if he does not know what
is an offence and what is not an offence, if he does not know
a slight and a serious offence, if he does not know what is an
offence that can be done away with and one that cannot be
done away with, if he does not know what is a very bad offence
and one that is not very bad, and if the two Pātimokkhas in
full have not been properly handed down to him, not properly
sectioned, not properly regulated, not properly investigated
clause by clause and in respect of the linguistic form, if he does
not know what is an offence and what is not an offence … if
he does not know what is a very bad offence and one that is
not very bad, and if he is not skilled in investigating a legal
question.²
22. If he is possessed of ten qualities … clever: if he knows what is


an offence … and if he is skilled in investigating a legal question.
23. A monk possessed of ten qualities may be agreed upon for a
referendum.¹
24. Dependent on ten reasons a rule of training for disciples is laid
down by the Tathāgata.²
25. Ten perils in entering a king’s women’s quarters.³
26. Ten objects as (alms-) gifts.⁴
27. Ten gems.⁵
28. A tenfold Order of monks.⁶
29. One may ordain through a group of ten (monks).⁷
30. Ten refuse-rag-robes.⁸
31. Wearers of ten colours for robes.⁹
32. One may wear an extra robe for at most ten days.¹⁰
33. Ten (colours of) semen.¹¹
34. Ten (kinds of) women.¹²
35. Ten (kinds of) wives.¹³
36. Ten points promulgated at Vesālī.¹⁴
37. Ten individuals who are not to be greeted.¹⁵
38. Ten ways of cursing.¹⁶
39. One brings slander in ten ways.¹⁷ BD 6.226
40. Ten lodgings.¹⁸
41. They asked for ten boons.¹⁹


42. Ten suspensions of the Pātimokkha are not legally valid.¹
43. Ten suspensions of the Pātimokkha are legally valid.²
44. Ten advantages from conjey.³
45. Ten (kinds of) flesh are not allowed.⁴
46. Ten “at mosts”.⁵
47. An experienced competent monk who is of ten years’ standing
may let go forth,⁶ may ordain,⁷ may give guidance,⁸ a novice
may attend him.⁹
48. An experienced competent nun who is of ten years’ standing¹⁰
may let go forth … a woman novice may attend her.¹¹
49. Agreement to ordain¹² may be accepted by an experienced
competent nun who is of ten years’ standing.
50. Training should be given to a girl who has been married for
ten years.¹³
Concluded are the Decades
its summary
Ill-will, averting, matters, Vin 5.140 wrong (view), and right (view), taking up an extreme (view),
And wrongnesses too, rightnesses,
unskilled, and also skilled, /
Not legally valid, and legally valid tickets,
novices, and expelling,
Speech, and legal question too,
motion, and slight too, /
Slight (and) serious these:
discriminate between the dark and the bright,
And referendum, and training, BD 6.227 and women’s quarters, objects, /
Gems, and tenfold,
likewise ordination,


Refuse-rags, and wearers,
ten days, semen, women, /
Wives, ten points, not to be greeted,
and about cursing,
And slander too, and lodgings,
and boons, not legally valid, /
Legally valid, conjey, and flesh,
“at mosts,” monk, nun,
Ordination, married girl:
the Decades are well proclaimed.
11. Elevens
Prv 7.11.1 1. Eleven individuals who, if they have not been ordained, should
not be ordained; if they have been ordained, they should be
expelled.¹
2. Eleven (kinds of) shoes are not allowable.²
3. Eleven (kinds of) bowls are not allowable.³
4. Eleven (kinds of) robes are not allowable.⁴
5. Eleven “up to the third time”.⁵
6. Eleven things which are stumbling-blocks (preventing women
from becoming) nuns should be asked about.⁶
7. Eleven (kinds of) robes may be allotted.⁷
8. Eleven (kinds of) robes may not be assigned.⁸
9. On the eleventh day at sunrise⁹ it is an offence of expiation
involving forfeiture.


10. Eleven (kinds of) “blocks” are allowable.¹
11. Eleven (kinds of) buckles are allowable.²
12. Eleven (kinds of) earth are not allowable.³
13. Eleven (kinds of) earth are allowable.⁴
14. Eleven nullifications of guidance.⁵
15. Eleven individuals are not to be greeted.⁶ BD 6.228
16. Eleven “at mosts”.⁷
17. They asked for eleven boons.⁸
18. Eleven defects in boundaries.⁹
19. Eleven perils to be expected for an individual who reviles and
abuses.¹⁰
20. If the freedom of mind that is loving-kindness¹is practised,
developed, made much of, made a basis, made a vehicle, persisted
in, become familiar with and well established eleven
advantages¹² are to be expected: one sleeps in comfort, wakes
in comfort, dreams no evil dream,¹³ is dear to human beings,
dear to non-human beings, devatās guard him, fire poison and
weapons do not affect him, his mind is easily concentrated, the
expression on his face is serene, he does his (karmic) time unconfused,
and if he penetrates no higher (to arahantship than
the attainment of loving-kindness) he reaches the Brahma-


world (on deceasing from this life). If the freedom of mind that
is loving-kindness is practised … well established, these eleven
advantages are to be expected.
Concluded are the Elevens
its summary
Should be expelled, and shoes,
and bowls, and robes,
The third, and should be asked about,
allotting, assigning, /
Sunrise, blocks, buckles, Vin 5.141 and not allowable, allowable,
Guidance, and also not to be greeted,
“at mosts,” and boons,
And defects in boundaries, reviling, loving-kindness—
The Elevens are done.
Concluded is As to Gradation
its summary BD 6.229 The Units, as well as the Dyads,
and the Triads, Tetrads, Pentads,
Six, seven, eights, and Nonads,
ten, and the Elevens, /
For the welfare of all beings,
by Such a One who made known Dhamma
Were the stainless Gradations taught by the Great Hero. /
